Route53

DNS
It is used to convert domain name to IP

IP addresses are used by computers to identify each other on a network

2 types of IP addresses
IPv4
IPv6

IPv4 is a 32 bit address and has over 4 billion different addresses
IPv6 is a 128 bit address and has over 340 undecillion addresses (36 zeroes)

Top Level Domain (TLD)
.com
.edu
.gov

Second Level Domain
.co.uk
.gov.uk
.com.au

TLDs are controlled by Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) in a root zone database which is a database of all available top level domains
https://www.iana.org/domains/root/db

Domain Registrars
Domain names have to be unique
A registrar is an authority that can assign domain names directly under one or more top level domains. These domains are registered with InterNIC, a service of ICANN, which enforces uniqueness of domain names across the Internet. Each domain name is registered in a central database known as Whois database.
Popular domain registrars include:-
https://www.godaddy.com
https://www.123-reg.co.uk/

SOA Record
Start Of Authority record stores
1.) Name of the server that supplies the data for the zone
2.) Administrator of the zone
3.) Current version of the data file
4.) Number of seconds a secondary name server should wait before checking for updates
5.) Number of seconds a secondary name server should wait before retrying a failed zone transfer
6.) Maximum number of seconds that a secondary name server can use data before it must be either refreshed or expired.
7.) Default number of seconds for the time to live on resource records.

NS Records
Name Servers are used by TLD servers to direct traffic to the Content DNS server which contains authoritative DNS records.

A Records
A stands for Address
It is used by computer to translate the name of the domain to IP address
Elastic Load Balancer do not have IP address. They have a domain name.

TTL
Time To Live
The length of time that a DNS record is cached on either the Resolving server or the users own local PC is equal to the Time To Live in seconds. The lower the time to live, the faster changes to the DNS record take to propagate throughout the internet.

CNAME
Canonical Name
It is used to resolve one domain name to another.
http://m.zyx.com and http://mobile.zyx.com will resolve to the same address.

Alias Record
Alias records are used to map resource record set in your hosted zone to Elastic Load Balancer, CloudFront distribution or S3 buckets that are configured as websites.
Alias records work like CNAME record in that you can map one DNS name (www.example.com) to another 'target' DNS name (el123.elb.amazonaws.com)
Key difference
A CNAME cant be used for naked domain names (zone apex). You cant have a CNAME for http://acloud.zone, it must be either an A record or an Alias.
Alias resource record set can save you time because Amazon Route 53 automatically recognize changes in the record sets that the alias resource record set refers to.
Eg-
Suppose an alias record set for example.com points to an ELB load balancer at lb1-1234.us.east-1.elb.amazonaws.com. If the IP address of the load balancer changes, Amazon Route 53 will automatically reflect those changes in DNS answers for example.com without any changes to the hosted zone that contain resource record sets for example.com.

Exam Tip
1.) ELB's do not have a pre defined IPv4 address, you resolve them using a DNS name.
2.) Difference between CNAME and Alias record
You cannot resolve individual AWS resources using Alias record
3.) Given the choice always choose Alias Record over CNAME.

Route53 Routing Policy
Simple
Weighted
Latency
Failover
Geolocation

Simple Routing Policy
This is the default routing policy when you create a new record set. This is most commonly used when you have a single resource that performs a given function for your domain. Eg - one web server that server content for http://acloud.guru website.

Weighted Routing Policy
It lets you split your traffic based on different weights assigned.
Eg-
You can set 10% of traffic to go to US-EAST-1 and 90% traffic to go to US-WEST-1

Latency Routing Policy
It allows you to route your traffic based on the lowest network latency for your end user. (ie. which region will give them the fastest response time)
To use latency based routing you create a latency resource record set for the Amazon EC2 (or ELB) resource in each region that hosts your website. When Amazon Route 53 receives a query for your site, it selects the latency resource record set for the region that gives the user the lowest latency. Route53 then responds with the value associated with that resource record set.

Failover Routing Policy
It is used to create an active/passive set up.
Primary Site -> EU-WEST-2
Secondary DR Site -> AP-SOUTHEAST-2
Route53 will monitor the health of your primary site using health check.
Health check monitors the health of your end points.

Geolocation Routing Policy
Geolocation routing lets you choose where your traffic will be sent based on the geographical location of your user (ie. location from which DNS queries originate).
Eg - you might want all your queries from Europe to be routed to a fleet of EC2 instances that are specially configured for your European customers. These servers might have local language of your European customers and all prices are displayed in Euros.

DNS Exam Tips
1.) ELB's do not have a pre defined IPv4 address, you resolve them using a DNS name.
2.) Difference between CNAME and Alias record
You cannot resolve individual AWS resources using Alias record
3.) Given the choice always choose Alias Record over CNAME.
4.) Route53 Routing Policy
Simple
Weighted
Latency
Failover
Geolocation
5.) Route 53, there is a default limit of 50 domain names. However, this limit can be increased by contacting AWS support.
